# aim1resp-updated
Superfund Aim 1: Juvenile (10wpf) Respirometry Data Analysis (Updated)
R code for data processing & analysis

## About the Project
Duke University Superfund Research Center, Project 4, Aim 1. Looking at later-life effects of early-life exposures to REPSE and heavy metals. 
Using Atlantic killifish <i> (Fundulus heteroclitus) </i> from three different sites. 

Subjects are 10-12wpf F1 juveniles from each of three different __populations__, who were treated from 0-12dpf with one of six __chemical treatments__. Then, for the 48h prior to respirometry, juveniles were exposed to one of three __stressor treatments__.

Experiments were performed Fall 2025 by S. Phelps and M. Chernick. For more detailed notes regarding methods, see the Aim 1 notebook in the lab. For data sheets with source times, see the Aim 1 datasheet binder in the lab.

### Populations (F0s collected from site)
- King's Creek (KC): reference, low-contaminant site
- Republic (REP): PAH-contaminated site
- Pescara Creek (PES): metals-contaminated site
### Embryonic Treatments
- Control: 25ppt artificial sea water (ASW)
- Cd: 2 ppb Cadmium Chloride (CdCl2) in 25ppt ASW. 
- Pb: 5 ppb Lead Chloride (PbCl2) in 25ppt ASW.
- REPSE: 0.5% Republic sediment extrace (REPSE) in 25ppt ASW.
- REPSE+Cd: 0.5% REPSE + 2 ppb CdCl2 in 25ppt ASW.
- REPSE+Pb: 5ppb PbCl2 in 25ppt ASW.
### Juvenile Stressors
- Control: 28C, incubator with ambient oxygen levels.
- Hypoxia: 28C, incubator with decreased oxygen levels.
- Heat Stress: 34-36C, incubator with ambient oxygen levels.

<!-- # Setup

After cloning the Git repo, run setup/foldersetup.sh in the project directory to prepare the directory structure.

Then you will want to manually move the raw data from wherever you're storing it (i.e. OneDrive, Box Drive) into the project's data/raw-data/ directory by copying and pasting them in File Explorer (or moving them using the command line if you're more comfortable with that). The raw-data/ directory is not tracked by Git in order to keep the size of the repo down. Same thing applies to analysis/subprocessed-data.

## About the Files and Folders

respirometry-metadata.csv is a CSV file generated by exporting the Excel spreadsheet made by Melissa by manually inputting the values recorded by hand on the respirometry data sheets.
raw-data/ contains the files generated by the WitroxView software during recordings. These files __should not be altered in any way__.
analysis/ contains the R codes needed to process the raw data into normalized oxygen consumption measurements.
data/subprocessed-data/ contains the modified versions of the raw-data/ files, which have been cleaned up and saved in a more usable format by the code in respirometry-data-processing.Rmd.
analysis/tidy-metadata.csv contains the tidy, trimmed version of the spreadsheet in respirometry-metadata.csv.

-->
<!-- fix the above notes!! -->

# Methods notes

## Respirometer Setup

The respirometer being used contains 8 jars (also referred to as "lanes"), each of which is connected to an oxygen probe from a Witrox box. Each box has 4 probes. Lanes 1-4 are connected to "Box 1" (Witrox-0177), and lanes 5-8 are connected to "Box 2" (Witrox-0242). 
Each box saves its own file.

## About the Data

Raw data are dissolved oxygen readings collected with a Witrox 4 device + probes and logged using WitroxView software (Loligo systems).
DO readings are in mmol O2/L.
File names are structured accordingly: "[date] [population] [treatment] [lane #s in file].csv"
Oxygen readings at the start and end of each measurement, any important notes, and subject weights and lengths, were recorded manually on the data sheets during each run. These sheets can be found in the binder in the lab titled "Superfund Aim 1 Respirometry Datasheets". These values were manually input into Excel by Melissa; the spreadsheet can be found in her Box folder, or in .csv form (all data except for notes) in respirometry-metadata.csv in this repo.